   Transnational
   Red Sea
   CenterBridging Science
   & Diplomacy for
   the Future of Corals Navigation

                              Science & Education

   Paving the way for future technological applications potentially
   enabling to rehabilitate coral reefs worldwide.
   Science Published on August 19th, 2025

   The Coral Reef Monitoring Toolbox developed by the TRSC is now being
   implemented in Jordan as part of a global strategy.
   Science Published on May 25th, 2025

   In Jordan, the TRSC is setting a new standard for marine ecosystem
   observation and conservation in the Red Sea, and beyond.
   Science Published on March 20th, 2024

   Discover the new tool developed by TRSC’s partner Prof Devis Tuia and
   his team at EPFL, now being implemented in the Red Sea
   Science Published on May 4th, 2021

   A new research gives additional insight into the specific genetic
   factors that allow Red Sea corals to survive
   Science Published on January 29th, 2021

   A major discovery helps explain the symbiotic relationship between
   corals and algae

Sharing & inspiring

   The Transnational Red Sea Center has organized over the past years
   several educational and training workshops in Jordan, Djibouti, Sudan
   and Eritrea as well as at EPFL in Switzerland, bringing together
   scientific partners and students from the Red Sea region.

   In parallel, the TRSC has organized or participated in numerous public
   outreach events in the Red Sea region, in Switzerland and beyond such
   as: conferences, panel discussions, workshops, photo exhibition or
   specific program to raise awareness through art.
     * Watch the video of the 2023 workshop, Djibouti
     * Watch the video of the 2024 opening of the Voices of the Reef
       exhibition, Aqaba

Pioneering studies

   Since the early 2010s, a growing number of scientific studies have
   revealed to the world the exceptional resistance of the corals of the
   Red Sea (the Gulf of Aqaba in particular) to climate warming. The most
   likely origin of this unique capacity dates back to just after the last
   Ice Age, when the ancestors of today’s coral population slowly
   re-colonized the Red Sea from the Indian Ocean. Entering the Red Sea
   through the Bab el-Mandeb strait, these corals had to adapt to the
   extremely warm water of the southern Red Sea. Migrating further north
   in the Red Sea system, the corals encountered much lower water
   temperatures. Today we have in the northern Red Sea and Gulf of Aqaba a
   population of corals with a ‘physiological memory’ of living at very
   high temperatures (to which their ancestors adapted). They can
   therefore easily tolerate the water temperatures anticipated at the end
   of this century and beyond: i.e. 2-3 °C warmer than today. No other
   major coral reef is expected to survive such warm conditions. The
   corals of the Red Sea are therefore Humanity’s absolutely best chance
   of preserving at least one major coral reef ecosystem alive and
   functioning for future generations.

   Since the pioneering work by Fine et al. in 2013, many other studies
   have been undertaken to better understand this phenomenon of colossal
   significance for the entire planet, at a time when corals are bleaching
   and dying on a massive scale everywhere but in the Red Sea, primarily
   due to rising temperatures and local pollution pressure.

   Read below these pioneering studies and follow their regular updates.

   None

Scientific studies on Red Sea corals

     * Fast and pervasive transcriptomic resilience

PNAS, May 2021
     * Warming resistant corals from Aqaba

Peerj, May 2021
     * Heat stress destabilizes symbiotic

PNAS, February 2021
     * High and consistent coral tolerance

ASLO, February 2021
     * Reduce thermal tolerance

SpringerLink, February 2021
     * Carryover effects

Journals biologists, January 2019
     * Resilience of the Red Sea coral

ScienceDirect, June 2018
     * Resilience to thermal stress

ResearchGate, December 2017
     * Thermal refugia

Wiley online library, October 2017
     * Common reef-building coral

The Royal Society, May 2017
     * A coral reef refuge

Wiley online library, August 2013

   None The Center Expeditions & Programs Science & Education News & Media
   Contact Close nav

Bridging Science & Diplomacy for the future of corals

Hosted at

     * EPFL

Supported by

     * DFAE
     * Swiss National Science Foundation
     * Private foundation
       in Geneva
